JALLIANWALA BAGH TRAGEDY: -
On April 13, 1919, what was planned as a protest gathering of Indians in a compound called Jallianwala Bagh in Amritsar, Punjab, in then British-ruled India, witnessed violence that would become one of the most lasting memories of the barbarity of colonial rule.
A British Colonel named Reginald Edward Harry Dyer ordered troops to surround the compound, situated between houses and narrow lanes, and launched indiscriminate firing on the assembled men, women and children who lacked the means to escape. Some of them jumped into a well located within the premises to escape the bullets. According to the British, around 400 people were killed in the firing, the youngest of whom was nine-years-old and the oldest was 80. Indian historians peg the toll at 1,000.
While British rule in India led to numerous atrocities before and after Jallianwala Bagh, the nature of the violence that unfolded on unarmed civilians led to widespread condemnation later, including from British authorities. Wartime British Prime Minister Winston Churchill went on to describe the day as “monstrous” and an inquiry was set up to probe Dyer’s orders.
April 13 saw celebrations for the Sikh festival of Baisakhi, which marks the onset of Spring and the harvest of winter crops. Simultaneously, the movement for independence from British rule had been steadily gaining ground in recent years, and an event was held at Jallianwala Bagh to defy colonial orders and protest against the recently passed Rowlatt Bills.
These Bills curtailed the civil liberties of Indians and let colonial forces arrest people without any warrant or trial. One of the Acts was pushed through the Legislative Council ignoring objections of elected Indian representatives, leading to resentment among Indians. Some violent protests had been witnessed in cities of Delhi, Bombay (now Mumbai) and Lahore as well, even as MK Gandhi called for the launch of a non-violent peaceful protest at the time.
Sir Michael O’Dwyer imposed martial rule in Lahore and Amritsar on April 11, but the order reached Amritsar only on April 14. He also sent Colonel Dyer, who was then holding the temporary rank of Brigadier General, from the Jalandhar cantonment to Amritsar.
By mid-afternoon, thousands of Indians had gathered in the Jallianwala Bagh (garden) near the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar. On April 13, a Sunday, Col Dyer’s troops marched through the town to warn against the assembly of more than four people. But the announcement did not reach most people, and devotees headed towards the Golden Temple. By 4 pm, many gathered for a public meeting against the arrest of Dr Satyapal and Dr Saifuddin Kitchlew for opposing the Rowlatt Act.
Dyer saw the assembly as a violation of government orders. “They had come to fight if they defied me and I was going to give them a lesson……I was going to punish them. My idea from the military point of view was to make a wide impression,” Dyer said to the Hunter Committee of 1920 (also termed the Report of Disorders Inquiry Committee) that was setup to investigate the disturbances across cities. It had a specific section discussing Dyer’s actions.
With his troops, Dyer entered the Bagh through a narrow alley, the only entry and exit path. The 1920 report noted that Dyer entered Jallianwala Bagh with 25 Gorkha soldiers and 25 Baluchis armed with rifles, 40 Gorkhas armed with only Khukris and two armoured cars. A crowd of around 10 to 12,000 was gathered there at the time.
“Without giving the crowd any warning to disperse, which he considered unnecessary as they were in breach of his proclamation, he ordered his troops to fire and the firing continued for about ten minutes,” the report said. It noted that no one in the crowd was carrying firearms though some may have been carrying sticks.
In all, the soldiers fired 1,650 rounds. A later investigation brought the number of killed up to 379. No figure was given for the wounded and it was thought that it may have been three times the dead. Indian leaders expressed their anger and protested in response to the killings. Notably, Nobel laureate poet Rabindranath Tagore gave up his knighthood.
