JALLIANWALA BAGH TRAGEDY: -
The 13 April 1919 Jallianwala Bagh Massacre (aka Amritsar Massacre) was an infamous episode of brutality which saw General Dyer order his troops to open fire on an unarmed crowd of men, women, and children trapped in an abandoned walled garden during a Sikh festival. At least 379 people died, and over 1,500 were injured in the massacre.
The Jallianwala Bagh massacre took place in the context of violent riots in April 1919 in the Punjab and elsewhere. The British authorities had lost control of Amritsar on 11 April, and Dyer had been sent by the Governor of Bengal to restore order. Dyer was unrepentant of his actions, thinking he had displayed the necessary force to prevent a further escalation in the civil unrest that had included the murder of five Europeans. An inquiry after the terrible massacre resulted in Dyer's dismissal from the army. The massacre was one of the most infamous episodes, perhaps the most infamous in the entire history of British colonial rule in India.
The British Raj (rule) of India had begun in 1858 after the British Crown and state took over the possessions of the British East India Company (EIC). The final act of the EIC had been to suppress the bloody Sepoy Mutiny of 1857-8. The acts of violence perpetrated by both sides in this rebellion against colonial rule made a deep impression, particularly on the British, who lived with a nagging fear that such an uprising could easily occur again. The British ruled over a far-from-united India. The country's divisions can be seen in political maps where Indian princely states had various degrees of dependence or neutrality. There were three great divisions in terms of religion: Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs. There was also the caste system and great economic disparities between regions and peoples. The division between colonists and subject peoples was far from clear-cut, with many Indians gaining employment in the British Indian Army and the civil service. Holding on to this shapeshifting cultural melting pot was the great challenge of the British Empire. India was the jewel in the crown of British imperialism, and it was a fine balancing act to exploit India's resources without causing open rebellion. That rebellions might occur came to be a fixation in the minds of many hardline Britishers, and there were indications that Indians were warming up to the idea of concerted and unified political action. The India National Congress had been founded in 1885, and the All Indian Muslim League in 1906. The partition of Bengal in 1905 caused much nationalist outrage (it was reversed in 1911). Following the development of mass-based politics in the first decade of the 20th century, more and more Indians were challenging the British presence in India. The Congress and Muslim League joined forces in 1916 with the Lucknow Pact, which set out what was considered the necessary constitutional reforms that would allow an independent Indian government.
Colonial tensions in India were acerbated by the First World War (1914-18). Indians had fought to protect British interests in India and abroad (in Europe, the Middle East, and East Africa), but many returning soldiers could not find meaningful employment. India had also given significant equipment and raw materials for the war effort, which highlighted more than ever the failings of the British administration. The Punjab region in the northern part of the Indian subcontinent was seen as a particularly dangerous place for British interests.  The Indians of various faiths there were remarkably united and politically active, such as the Ghadar party, which dedicated itself to kicking the British out of India.
Then came the March 1919 Rowlatt Acts. Essentially, these acts allowed the British administration to continue to use the powers of control and imprisonment, which had been employed to repress protests during the World War. Indians were subject to imprisonment without cause, trial without a jury, and a range of punishments expressly designed to humiliate. On 8 April, Mahatma Gandhi (1869-1948), the central figure in the Indian independence movement, called for Indians to suspend work in response to the Rowlatt Acts. Many Indians followed Gandhi's call for peaceful civil disobedience, but the British stood firm and refused to repeal the Acts. There were riots, arson attacks, lootings, and clashes with police, including in Amritsar, a city in the Punjab, where a mob killed five British men on 10 April. There were other notable episodes of riots in Delhi and Ahmadabad. Gandhi was arrested, but he called for his supporters to show restraint, a plea many ignored. As a consequence of the unrest, no public gatherings of any kind were permitted.
By mid-afternoon, thousands of Indians had gathered in the Jallianwala Bagh (garden) near the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar. On the afternoon of 13 April, 15-20,000 Indian civilians gathered in the abandoned walled garden of Jallianwala Bagh, a space that, crucially, had only five narrow entrances. Many people were there to peacefully celebrate the Sikh Baisakh festival and visit its accompanying fair. Others were there to protest against the recent imprisonment of nationalists, and still others would have been passing through as it was a major thoroughfare in the city and the site of an important Sikh temple, the Golden Temple. The garden was really a sort of wasteland and provided a large open space sufficient in size to hold such a gathering of humanity. It is possible, too, that many of the crowd had not even heard of Dyer's public announcements that morning as many would have come from outside Amritsar. A British plane flying over the area convinced some of the crowd to go home.
Dyer arrived at the Jallianwala Bagh at 5 pm, and with him were his two armoured cars and around 90 men, mostly Gurkhas and Indian troops. The gateway they used to access the square was not wide enough to permit the entry of the two armoured cars, and so Dyer ordered only his infantry inside. Without giving any warning to the gathered crowd, Dyer ordered his men to begin firing into them and to continue firing. No warning shots were given. The slaughter went on for around ten minutes, during which time the soldiers had time to reload their magazines. In total, 1,650 shots were fired. Dyer had ordered his men to pick their targets and deliberately fire on those attempting to escape over the high walls of the enclosure and at the doorways. Dyer then ordered his men to leave, and no help was given to the wounded. According to the official statistics, 379 men, women, and children were killed, and over 1,500 were injured. The death toll may well have been, in reality, much higher.
Indians remained outraged at the massacre. The celebrated Bengali author Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941) was so disgusted that he sent back his knighthood. Even some of the pro-British rulers of the independent princely states like the Raja of Nabha voiced their disapproval of Dyer's excessive use of force. The fantastic pension 'reward' for Dyer shocked many Indians more than the massacre itself. It was now impossible to blame the events on a rogue soldier who had exceeded his orders. As the future prime minister of India Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964) noted: "I realized then, more vividly than I had ever done before, how brutal and immoral imperialism was and how it had eaten into the souls of the British upper classes" (Tharoor, 173). Further, the failure of the Hunter Committee to find anyone guilty of anything when there had obviously been so much unnecessary violence and acts of humiliation in the Punjab in 1919 illustrated all too clearly that the British administration had whitewashed history. Above all, the non-cooperation movement led by Gandhi was now able to draw on a much wider base of support and continued from 1920 to push for 'home rule'. Indians of all classes took a far more active role in persuading Britain by whatever means necessary that it must grant independence, an achievement finally made in 1947. As the historian S. Mansingh notes, Jallianwala Bagh became the beginning of the end of British rule in India.
